# How To Run and/or Update the End-to-End (E2E) tests

## Run E2E tests locally

### 0. Pre-requisites

The e2e tests rely on the client and cms repos being present. It is assumed that they are checked out at the same level as this `ussf-portal` repo and have the default names `ussf-portal-client` and `ussf-portal-cms`.

### Change directory

You will need to be in the `e2e` directory

`cd e2e`

### Install playwright

You will need the dependencies installed so run the following.

```sh
yarn
yarn e2e:install
```

### Shutdown any other docker containers

Since the normal services can conflict with the current setup of e2e tests you probably want to shut everything else down. The following command will remove all containers.

`yarn services:removeall`

### Start the services

You will need everything running before running any of the tests. This repo has a docker compose file that does just that. Since this command will build the client and cms docker images it can take a while.

`yarn services:up`

> NOTE: this will start everything in the forground which can be helpful for debugging, but you can run the following to start in the background if that's prefered.

`yarn services:up -d`

### Run E2E tests in github actions manually

Once the services are up, it still may take a minute before you are ready to run tests because sometimes the keystone database takes a bit to start up. To account for this in our GitHub Actions, we use a tool called [wait-on](https://github.com/jeffbski/wait-on), which allows us to wait for a 200 OK from the servers before executing our tests. If you would like to replicate this behavior when running tests locally, you can run the following after running `yarn services:up`:

`yarn wait-on http://localhost:3001/api/sysinfo http://localhost:3000/api/sysinfo && yarn e2e:test`

Alternatively, you can manually verify that all services are running and then simply run the playwright based tests:

`yarn e2e:test`

### Debugging playwright tests

If you are having issues with tests, Playwright offers many ways to get to the root of the problem.

A quick way to step through each line in a test and pinpoint exactly where it is failing would be to run the following command:

`yarn e2e:debug`

You can also specify which test you want to execute by adding `.only` after `test`. This is helpful when attempting to fix/debug a test and you do not want to run the entire e2e test workflow each time. You can add `.only` to as many tests as you want. So for example, if you are trying to test three subsequent tests, you can limit Playwright's execution to just those three. Here is an example:

```
test.only('can add a new custom collection to My Space', () => ...)
```

Another useful debugging tool that Playwright provides is the Trace Viewer. From the Playwright docs, "Trace Viewer is a GUI tool that helps you explore recorded Playwright traces after the script has ran." This allows you to see screenshots of the test at every point in its execution, what actions were taken, what assertion caused the test to fail, etc.

In order to access the trace for a specific failed test, you need to locate its `trace.zip` file. Each trace is stored in a folder, under the `test-results` folder, with a name that is generated by Playwright. An example of such a name would be `myspace-MySpace-can-add-a-new-custom-collection-to-My-Space-PORTAL-CLIENT-E2E`. So if this test failed and you wanted to see the trace, the command would look like this:

`npx playwright show-trace test-results/myspace-MySpace-can-add-a-new-custom-collection-to-My-Space-PORTAL-CLIENT-E2E/trace.zip`

You can also view the trace of a test that failed in GitHub Actions. In order to do this, you need to get the artifacts from the failed e2e workflow, and there are two ways to do this:

- In the GitHub UI, navigate to the failed workflow and scroll to the bottom of the page. You should see under `Artifacts` a file named `playwright-results`. Click on it and it will download onto your machine.
- If you have the GitHub CLI installed, you can run `gh run list` to see recent workflow runs. Under the `ID` column, copy the run id that you want and run `gh run download <run id> -n playwright-results`.

After you have the artifacts downloaded, the process is the same as above:

`npx playwright show-trace <path-to-the-trace.zip>`

## Standard workflow

The e2e tests for the portal client and cms live in this repository now. During the pull request stage, for the workflows to pass in this repository or the others, you will need to use the **same _branch name_** in all 3 repos.

Update the code as usual in client or cms repos. Then update or write the e2e tests once the PRs are in the review stage.

> NOTE the workflow for running the e2e tests is run during the cms and client repos, but at this time is not required to avoid having the flakey tests hold up every PR. It will be the responsibility of the PR author and reviewers to ensure that PRs are not breaking the e2e tests in an unexpected way. The expectation is that we will require this to pass again once the job is shorter and much less flakey.
